---
title: Deltas
category: 'Rivers & Flooding'
layout: page
keywords: "deltas, deposition, topset bed, bottomset bed, foreset bed, erosion, mouth, nile, cuspate, bird's foot, arcuate"
---

Deltas
------

### What is a Delta?

Deltas are depositional land forms. Deltas are found at a river's mouth, by the sea, or as a river joins a lake or reservoir where there is a low tidal range (The height difference between the high and low tides. A low range means that deposition can occur without being washed away). They spread out to sea as what are known as “Deltaic Deposits”. They are flat areas of land and consist of many distributaries (The opposite to a tributary, it flows away form the river) and levees. Levees often join together in deltas due to spits and bars which form lagoons (bayous). 

### Delta Beds

Deltas are made up of three different types of beds. The bottom bed, the _bottom-set_ bed, is mainly composed of clay. When clay comes into contact with salt water a process called flocculation occurs were an electric charge develops and the clay and salt particles clump together. As a result of the increased mass, the particles sink forming the bottom-set bed. The next bed is the _fore-set_ bed, composed primarily of silt and slightly coarse particles. This deposition occurs simply due to a loss of energy as the river's gradient flattens. The topmost bed is the _top-set_ bed. This is composed of coarse material, mostly sand and is again the result of the river loosing energy and so depositing its load. 

Shapes of Deltas
----------------

There are three primary shapes:

### [Cuspate](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:STS61C-42-72.jpg)

#### E.g Niger River

Cuspate deltas are triangular in shape (which is where the term delta comes from, the greek letter delta Δ). They form when a river meets a sea with alternating current directions. These alternating current directions shape the delta so that it looks similar to a triangle. 

### [Bird's Foot](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Mississippi_delta_from_space.jpg) 

#### E.g Mississippi River Delta

Bird's foot deltas are named as so due to their shape that somewhat resembles a bird's foot. The only one in existence is the Mississippi River Delta. Bird's foot deltas have many distributaries and, as a result of deposition, they have many lagoons.

### [Arcuate](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:NileDelta-EO.JPG)

#### E.g Nile River

Arcuate deltas are round and look similar to a bow. They have dendritic patterns of distributaries and sediment deposited at the delta is moved around by long shore drift.  