---
title: Flooding
category: 'rivers'
layout: page
keywords: "flooding, geography, as, percipitation, recurrence interval, flood management"
---

Flooding occurs when a river's discharge exceeds the capacity of its channel causing it to overflow its banks. 

## Natural Causes

- Excessive precipitation saturating the ground, preventing infiltration and so causing overland flow. 
- Intense precipitation which occurs faster than the ground can absorb precipitation, leading to overland flow. 
- Meltwater from snow flowing into a river can increase its discharge. 
- Climatic hazards such as hurricanes and cyclones which create intense amounts of precipitation. 
- Steep slopes increase the speed at which water can enter the river increasing the river's peak discharge causing it to exceed its capacity. 
- Impermeable rocks decrease infiltration  and increase surface run off so that more water enters the river. 

## Unnatural causes

- Urbanisation reduces infiltration and increases surface run off due to the increase in impermeable surfaces. 
- Deforestation reduces interception and absorption, increasing the amount of water entering the river. A lack of trees to bind the soil also increases mass wasting into the river. This, in turn, will reduce the capacity of the river and result in lower discharge levels causing the river to flood. 
- Changes in land usage can effect the amount of water entering the river. 

## The Recurrence Interval	

Hydrologists try and forecast the likelihood of floods by looking at past records of river peak discharges and the years that they occurred in. Using this data, they can calculate the *recurrence interval* of a flood of a specific scale. 

> "Recurrence Interval" = ("Number Of Years On Record" + 1) / "Ranking Of Flood"
> 
> Recurrence Interval = (n + 1) ÷ m

For example, a flood with a discharge of 18m<sup>3</sup>s<sup>-1</sup> which was ranked the 12th largest flood has a recurrence interval of:

> (40+1) ÷ 12 = 3.42 (Years)

We therefore expect this river to have a discharge of 18m<sup>3</sup>s<sup>-1</sup> every 3.42 years. 

### Criticisms Of The Recurrence Interval

- It's entirely dependent upon the size of the record (the number of years on record). 
- Extreme events that are possible within a longer time period appear as anomalies yet in a wider record, they would not be so unexpected. 
- The occurrence of a large flood does not mean it cannot occur again for a given time since recurrence intervals are just averages. 
- Past data being used to calculate the probability of future events may have been produced under very different environmental condition than contemporary data. For example, due to global warming, data obtained in the past will no longer be as reliable. 

## Managing And Preparing For Floods

- Levèes increase the capacity of the river. Artificial and natural levèes exist with artificial levèes generally being higher.  
- Dams and weirs. 
- Diversion channels and retention basins. 
- Straightening the channel allows water to flow away faster.  
- Floodplain zoning. Building away from floodplains will allow the river to naturally flood without damaging properties. 

### Flood Management In The UK

Responsibility for flood management ultimately falls to the DEFRA however 80% of the DEFRA's budget is allocated to the environmental agency. The environmental agency spend £4 Million a year on raising awareness and educating the public through leaflets, television and the internet. They attempt to educate people on what do before, during and after a flood. The money for the environmental agency is raised through taxes paid by the whole country, not just those in flood risk areas. Flood defence systems are handled by the local authorities and internal drainage boards. This system for preparing for and responding to floods isn't particularly effective. Despite the environmental agency's large budget, very few people still do not know how to respond to a flood in their area.  