---
title: The Glen Rosa & The River Arran
category: 'rivers'
layout: page
keywords: "geln rosa, river, arran, case study"
---

1. The Jole of Arran is located to the North west of Britain, to the west of Scotland. It's roughly 36 km from the cost of Scotland. It's in the northern hemisphere with a latitude of 55.5˚ and a longitude of 5.2˚ west of Greenwich Mean. It's parallel to the town of Prestwick. It's 65 km southwest of Glasgow.  
2. The mouth of the river is at 0136. The source of the river is possibly located at 9741. The drainage basin occupies an area of roughly 15 km². 
3. The annual rainfall of Arran ranges from 750 mm - 1500 mm depending on the location and height. 
4. The relief of the drainage basin is high (404 - 700 m) so there are very steep sides increasing surface run off into the drainage basin. 
5. Close to the source there is little vegetation so interception is low increasing the amount of water entering the basing. Closer to the mouth of the river there is more vegetation resulting in an increased level of interception and reduced surface run off but there is still little interception as the amount of vegetation is still small. Since most of the vegetation in the basin is shrub based there is little interception and transpiration by shrubs. The main rock type is an igneous granite that is impermeable. As a result there is little infiltration and therefore lots of surface run off. Since the rock is impermeable the surface soil will quickly become saturated again increasing the surface run off. 
6. The drainage density is the amount of water entering the river through tributaries. Since the Glen Rosa river has many tributaries and a high drainage density the water in the river will flow quickly as a result of the high volume. 