---
title: 13 - Boscastle Floods
category: 'Rivers & Flooding'
layout: page
---

Boscastle, located in the southwest of England, on the west coast of Cornwall, experienced torrential rain and flash floods on August the 16<sup>th</sup>, 2004 at midday. Thunderclouds developed over the southwest of England, the remnants of Hurricane Alex and the intense heating of the surface in the summer heat, evaporating massive amounts of water. The rain began to fall minutes later in a localised storm over high ground located inland of Boscastle. Soon after the rain started, a flood warning was issued. The rain continued for hours. At its peak, 24.1mm of rain fell in just 15 minutes at Lesnweth and 89mm was recorded in an hour in Boscastle. At 15:30, over two hours since the storm began, the River Valency burst its banks after rising 2m in height. This caused water to start pooling behind debris caught under a bridge. When the bridge collapsed, a 3m wave, that travelled at 4ms<sup>-1</sup> was unleashed, causing extensive structural damage. At 5pm, the flood had reached its peak level and extensive damage had been inflicted upon properties and vehicles. A helicopter rescue operation launched just a few hours earlier continued until 2:30am. The operation rescued 150 people.  

The River Valency was able to flood so easily for a variety of reason. The localised storm formed over a highland area known as Bodmin Moor. This area is mainly composed of impermeable rocks such as a shale and slate and lacks vegetation, increasing surface run off in the area due to a lack of infiltration (due to the impermeable rock) and a lack of interception and absorption. This, combined with the high relief in the area, caused the rainwater to enter surrounding streams very quickly. The River Valency has a high drainage density, so a lot of these streams led into the river, ultimately increasing its discharge. The land surrounding the River Valency had been saturated by previous heavy rainfall, reducing the ability for water to infiltrate into the ground and so increasing surface run off into the river further. The narrow valley surrounding the River Valency helped to speed up the water's speed as it was funnelled through the valley, increasing the likelihood that the river would burst its banks. This all lead to the River Valency experiencing a level of discharge substantially higher than its capacity. As it forms a confluence with the River Jordan in Boscastle, which will have been experiencing similar effects, the rivers overflowed and burst their banks, flooding the surrounding area of Boscastle.

As the floodplain surrounding the rivers had been urbanised, water was unable to infiltrate the asphalt, leading to an increase in discharge in the rivers and also increasing the resulting damage from when the river did flood, since buildings were located on the flood plain. The channels flowing through Boscastle had been walled off. This stopped the river from adjusting to the increased discharge during the heavy rainfall and limited its efficiency, causing it to flood.

Due to well executed rescue operations, nobody was reported as dead or seriously injured. The floods still caused extensive structural damage however. 75 cars, 5 caravans and 6 buildings were washed out to sea as well as several boats. The large number of cars was largely due to the low altitude of the car park which allowed the flood water to flow into the car park and wash away the cars. Close to 100 homes and businesses were destroyed with debris being spread over a large section of the area. The main section of the “lower bridge” was also destroyed when debris became stuck behind it, causing water to build up. When the bridge was destroyed, the water released caused more damage to the surrounding buildings. 

Short term responses to the flood included a search and rescue party being sent out within hours of the flood. Cars, trees and other debris were removed from the roads and a temporary fix to the damaged lower bridge was set up. By September, work had begun on an overflow culvert, to help divert the flow of the water. In early 2005, the majority of shops had reopened. The water supply was restored later in 2005, along with a new power supply (which had been taken out during the thunderstorm). The local council helped to strengthen the flood defence systems and the town was deemed “rebuilt”. In 2006, work on widening and lowering the channel began, in an attempt to increase the capacity of the river so that it can deal with sudden increases increases in discharge better. Finally, in recent years, the lower bridge was demolished and a new bridge was constructed which is less likely to be blocked off with debris should the river flood gain. In June 2007, the river flooded again however due to these improved flood defence systems and the altered channel, the damage was minimised. 

Overall, there was a peak discharge of 140m<sup>3</sup>/s on August the 16<sup>th</sup> between 5 and 6pm. The flood caused millions of pounds in damages with each insurance claiming costing between £15,000 to £30,000 per property. The probability of a flood like this occurring is 1 in 400 years, with the probability of such extensive rainfall being even lower, at 1 in 1300 per year. 
