---
title: Tides
layout: article
category: coasts
---

> Tide goes in tide goes out, never a misommunication, you can't explain that.
>
> --- Bill O'Reily

Amazingly it is possible to explain how the tides work, it has been for quite some time. We've long known that the Moon and the Sun are responsible for the daily variation in the height of the tides and since the days of Isaac Newton we've known that it's their gravity which produces this variation. More recently we've discovered that there are a few other factors at play when it comes to the tides (mainly the topography of the ocean) but they're beyond the scope of the Geography A-Level. 

## Gravity

_What follows is a high level overview of Newton's theory of gravity. It's not essential to the Geography A-Level but I think that understanding how gravity works makes understanding the tides a lot easier. Also, Physics is interesting, so you should read this anyway._

Everybody knows what gravity is because we experience it everyday. Most people don't know how gravity works though and I'm not going to pretend for one minute I do. What this section aims to explain is not how gravity works but rather some of the laws that it follows. 

Let's start off with the basics. Gravity is an attractive force and it is always attractive. You're never going to find repulsive gravity[^1]. Sorry to ruin your Sci-Fi dreams. Any object that has mass (that is to say, any object) has gravity. The object produces a _gravitational field_ that is _sort of_ like a magnetic field but it always points towards the centre of mass of the object and doesn't have any poles. The gravitational field of an object extends to infinity but it weakens as you get further away from the object following what is known as an _inverse square law_. Sounds scary but it's quite simple. If I double my distance from the object, the field strength is reduced by a factor of four. If I quadruple my distance, it's reduced by a factor of sixteen. What this effectively means is that moving a small distance in a gravitational field produces a comparatively large change in its strength.

The inverse square law describes how the strength of the gravitational field changes with distance but what controls the strength to begin with? The object's mass. This rule is even simpler than the inverse square law. If I increase my object's mass, the gravitational field strength increases proportionally. Double the mass, double the field strength. Triple the mass, triple the field strength. You get the picture. 

Let's take these two rules an put them in action. Consider Jupiter, the Earth and you. All three of these objects have a gravitational field and all three of these objects have a vastly different mass. Let's say your mass is 60kg, the Earth's is roughly 6&times;10^24 kg and Jupiter's is somewhere around 1.9&times;10^27 kg or 310 times the Earth's. In the current universe (universe 2 according to my friend [inside joke]), you are 6,400km from the centre of the Earth (for simplicity's sake, imagine the mass of the Earth and Jupiter is concentrated in an infinitesimally small ball in the centre of each planet). Jupiter is, at the time of writing, around 917 million kilometres away from the earth and you. Despite being quite a bit more massive than the Earth, you do not feel attracted to Jupiter (gravitationally[^2]) because it's _so far away from you_ that the gravitational field strength is almost imperceptible on the Earth.

Now let's move to another universe (universe 3). In this universe the laws of Physics were very different during the formation of the solar system so Jupiter was able to form where the Moon is in our universe. What this means is that the distance between the surface of Jupiter[^3] and the surface of the Earth (and you) is around 380,000km. What do you think the effects of this will be? Will you float away from the surface of the Earth towards Jupiter? <del>It's not a trick question</del> It's sort of a trick question. Make no mistake, the effects of Jupiter being this close to the Earth would be catastrophic but you wouldn't float away from the Earth[^4]. Even at this distance, Jupiter's gravitational field is still weaker than the Earth's at the Earth's surface because of the _inverse square law_. That's the point I wanted to make here, the inverse square law plays a huge role in the strength of a gravitational field. **Understanding this is key to understanding the tides**. 

## Tidal Forces

_This bit's important_.

[^1]: I'm going to regret writing this in a few years when someone publishes a paper about antigravity.

[^2]: I'm sorry, I had to make some joke about the attractiveness of Jupiter.

[^3]: In this universe Jupiter has a solid surface. It also has no moons to mess with this thought experiment.

[^4]: In order for Jupiter to pull you off of the surface of the Earth, the distance between the surface of the earth and the surface of Jupiter would need to be ~43,500km. Of course, even at this distance you wouldn't be pulled off of the surface of the Earth because the Earth, and by extension the surface, wouldn't exist anymore thanks to our old pal tidal forces. 